let's focus back on the aid crisis uh in
Gaza we can speak now to Jesse Marx
who's a senior advocate for the Middle
East at refugees International joins us
live from Washington DC Jesse so a drops
are happening Maritime supplies look set
to come in but is it going to be enough
we've heard 300 trucks a day of Aid are
needed for the north of Gaza
alone you the Israeli authorities have
argued including front of the icj that
they have facilitated
um and they have allowed some levels of
but as we can see against kind of a
clear pattern of wider obstruction of
Aid deliveries we have not seen
sufficient amounts get in and when we
have seen the Israelis attempt to
provide smaller amounts of Aid outside
of the UN we saw the Carnage that
occurred just last week now the pursuit
of more complicated and Last Resort Aid
responses like airdrops like Maritime
corridors further point to a level of
culpability you know functionally these
things are not sustainable air drops are
typically The Last Resort way to deliver
Aid and these are only used when there
is no other option uh they're
logistically challenging and they're
expensive and only allow a small amount
of Aid in the end meanwhile a maritime
Corridor is not going to be a silver
bullet think about the scale of
desperation and destruction in the north
that until now has gone unabated we have
issues of truck availability I spoke to
someone on the ground yesterday who
noted that an absent of trucks is going
to make it very challenging to actually
move aid from the the coastline into the
areas where it is critically needed
across the North and this further raises
questions about the ongoing closure and
limitations of the borders in the South
we have in the north Carney and Aras
that remain closed you can easily move
large amounts of Aid through those by
land from the ashad port and Northern
and Northern Gaza and in Israel and in
the South we still have Rafa and Karam
Shalom which until now are effectively
blocked up all right so Aid drops
insufficient Maritime Logistics
difficult getting aid from Port to where
they needed what's the
solution open more borders we we have
seen that when there is Will and when
there is capability both of which are on
the table right now you can move up to
500 trucks a day the Aid System into
Gaza is not new there was a Aid corridor
from Jordan that has been going on for
nearly two decades but after October 7th
that situation became increasingly more
complex with more blocks now to that
point the jordanians are having to move
trucks without scanners in certain cases
across the border or in some cases by
fery across from aaba through Egypt like
the system has become so complex and the
number of arbitrary impediments on the
table have made it such that you know a
truck which might normally prior to the
war take just a couple of hours to drive
might take multiple days so
fundamentally the Israelis have to
facilitate more Aid this requires the
White House is going to have to put more
pressure you can pursue more complicated
Concepts like Maritime corridors and
aird drops but fundamentally the ground
route is still the most viable How
concerned are you that if a ceasefire is
not agreed and it's stalled right now
and that the situation is just going to
spiral into one of yet more tragedy and
horror for those in
Gaza we thought we saw the worst case in
December when they were attempting to
negotiate the last ceas fire the
situation has become infinitely worse we
are already seeing famine and pockets of
famine pop up around Gaza we've already
seen the first uh casualties as a result
of malnutrition and dehydration among
children the situation is already at its
worst and it will continue to slip you
know there were experts at John Hopkins
University uh just flag recently that
we're expecting a worse casualty event
the potential of an additional 70,000
casualties by August if things continue
to move without any kind of peace or
even slow down in the conflict but now
we're contending with a potential
Invasion into Rafa we're looking at 1.5
million people who are already starving
suffering from overcrowded conditions
lack of medical access and without a
feasible means to deliver and surge
large amounts of Aid to them we're
looking at a mass casualty event in the
coming months and now your team traveled
to Egypt Jordan to enter Israel and Gaza
uh in January I think it was wasn't it
so tell us just very briefly what you
found in terms of when you you spoke to
those uh who've fled the fighting and
also those involved in in the aid uh
provisioning certainly I mean our our
research painted a very different
picture than what the Israelis painted
at the icj right we saw routine and
arbitrary denial of basic humanitarian
Goods in one case we spoke with an NGO
who told us because they couldn't
deliver P tent poles they were forced to
send in plastic tarp and duct tape and
told recipients on the other side to dig
through the rebel to find metal bars
like that level of of control over items
uh that in any other crisis would be
perceived as acceptable just to provide
people a level of shelter we also saw a
highly complicated Israeli inspection
and approval process that lacked any
sense of clear and consistent
instructions on top of all of this
inside of Gaza we spoke with a number of
people both in the UN and ngos and
Palestinians themselves who saw frequent
denials of basic humanitarian movements
it was increasingly challenging for the
UN to leave
their warehouses and provide Aid North
of the Gaza line into the north where
even going back two months we saw severe
levels of starvation and we've seen
those slip even wor worse since and
across the board you know NGS told us
they are scared people who deliver Aid
themselves are incapable of delivering
Aid because of how the conduct of this
war has been fought okay you know this
is
what Jesse I'm sorry to interrupt there
but we are going to have to move on do
you appreciate it it's very clear the
situation is Beyond crisis point I do
appreciate your perspective Jesse Mars
from refugees International thank
you thank you